---
title: 'Montauk: A not-so-strong town'
description: Car-dependent Montauk was a fun visit for one day, but with some not-so-drastic changes, Montauk, along with Long Island as a whole, can be transformed into a truly "strong" town.     
date: 2023-08-06
---

Montauk is known for being a cute coastal town with some beautiful beaches, and when it was portrayed in "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" by ___ ___, it was "cast" as just that. I've always thought of Montauk differently though, often marveling as how far it is from society (NYC) on the LIRR map. Now after my day trip to Montauk, I've seen what Montauk really is -- a once successful small town that has been destroyed by a lifestyle, or [what I call a "cancer"](https://stuyspec.com/article/cars-are-the-cancer-of-america), that has been taken to a uniquely American scale.

Taking the LIRR to Montauk was actually pretty nice, but as per usual, not without the unique quirks and annoyances of the MTA. My train's arrival at Jamaica (its first stop) was delayed by around five minutes, but other than that, my journey was pretty flawless up until I faced the first plaguing infrastructure problem. My train was halted for around 25 minutes -- because a train heading in an opposite direction from me was delayed. Why was this? Not even the MTA knows. But this delay affected me and MY train because further points of the line had been single-tracked. My train had to sit and wait for the other train to pass that area of track, and it sure was taking its sweet time. 

The Hamptons, Montauk, and those farther parts of Long Island are very popular destinations for vacation-getaways, weekend trips, and entitled suburbanites all the same. Many trips within this region are currently served by the LIRR's subpar service already, but many more could be served with some less-than-drastic changes. For one, the most heinous  single-track corridors must be upgraded to be double-track to prevent the most extreme delays and bottlenecks. For a country that has gone to the moon, the least we could do is add capacity to the lines that need it most, allowing for service to at least double, and possibly even quadruple. Additionally, since it is 2023, ALL parts of the LIRR network should be electrified. Many NIMBYs (not-in-my-backyard folks) would probably oppose such an improvement out of fear of (positive) change or "the costs", but in my opinion, those same folks would far prefer the faster acceleration, higher speeds, and increased reliability of the electric multiple unit trains that **other** LIRR services enjoy. 

With electrification and without single-tracking, the LIRR will be able to provide a more frequent, convenient, and sped-up service all over Long Island, but especially the more remote areas such as the aforementioned Hamptons and Montauk. Such a LIRR revolution would bring many more people to Montauk via public transport, who previously weren't previously brave enough to endure the slow three-and-a-half hour train ride and atrocious frequency. Now that Montauk will have more people arriving at the same terminal as I did today, the town will have to get to work building some infrastructure along the road to its the train station that is unheard of for most parts of Suffolk county and may even come off as futuristic -- sidewalks. I know, sometimes I'm a bit too ambitious and demanding, but perhaps maybe one day, the future visitors and residents of Montauk will not be forced to risk their lives and walk along a shoulder of a high speed (more than 40mph) road for more than a mile to reach the actual town of Montauk from Montauk train station. The city itself could do more to return to its walkable roots, such as installing more sidewalks and crosswalks, but, at least in comparison to other American ~~cities~~ disasters, it is good enough. 

Small towns like Montauk don't need billions of dollars in investment for their public transport. Local rail service definitely isn't needed for a town that size, because local bus service can easily serve the vast majority of trips taken. To better serve visitors along one of the most common routes, a local bus can serve a route that starts around the Montauk train station and uses the road (that will soon hopefully have a sidewalk) to run directly to the town, and after making local stops in the downtown, can either run to the Montauk Point State Park (and its lighthouse) or to the other half of the island, forming a T-shape pattern. At the stops in Montauk's cozy downtown, there is a possiblity for a transfer to another bus line that serves the Montauk town itself. If these two bus lines were to be created, while running a modest 6 buses per hour in each of their directions, the trips that folks in Montauk take (which 95%+ of which are by car) could almost all be served by a convenient bus service, which would be doing wonders for improving the sustainability of this car-dependent town. 

